# initContainers in Kubernetes


- `initContainers` in Kubernetes are special containers that run and complete before any other containers in a Pod start. They are primarily used for setup tasks or preparations required for the main containers to run successfully. These tasks might include setting up configuration files, initializing databases, or performing any other pre-startup operations.
- For example - A process that pulls a code or binary from a repository that will be used by the main web application. That is a task that will be run only one time when the pod is first created. Or a process that waits for an external service or database to be up before the actual application starts. That’s where initContainers comes in.

## Real-life Use Cases

1. **Database Initialization**: In a microservices architecture, you might have services that require a database. You can use an `initContainer` to initialize or migrate the database schema before the main application container starts.
2. **Configuration Setup**: If your application requires specific configuration files or secrets, you can use an `initContainer` to fetch or generate these files before the main container starts.
3. **Data Preprocessing**: Suppose you have a data processing application that requires downloading or preprocessing data files before it can start processing. You can use an `initContainer` to handle these tasks.
4. **Dependency Installation**: If your application relies on specific dependencies or libraries that need to be installed before it starts, you can use an `initContainer` to install these dependencies.
5. **Security Setup**: In environments where security is critical, you might want to set up security-related configurations or permissions before the main container starts. `initContainers` can handle these tasks.
6. **File Synchronization**: In distributed systems, you might need to synchronize files across different nodes before starting the main application. `initContainers` can be used to handle this file synchronization process.
7. **Health Checks**: You can use `initContainers` to perform health checks or readiness probes before the main container starts to ensure that all required services are available.

Overall, `initContainers` provide a way to ensure that necessary setup tasks are completed before the main application container starts running, thus enhancing the reliability and stability of your application deployment in Kubernetes.

An initContainer is configured in a pod like all other containers, except that it is specified inside a initContainers section, like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: myapp-pod
  labels:
    app: myapp
spec:
  containers:
  - name: myapp-container
    image: busybox:1.28
    command: ['sh', '-c', 'echo The app is running! && sleep 3600']
  initContainers:
  - name: init-myservice
    image: busybox
    command: ['sh', '-c', 'git clone <some-repository-that-will-be-used-by-application> ;']
```

When a POD is first created the initContainer is run, and the process in the initContainer must run to a completion before the real container hosting the application starts.

You can configure multiple such initContainers as well, like how we did for multi-containers pod. In that case, each init container is run one at a time in sequential order.

If any of the initContainers fail to complete, Kubernetes restarts the Pod repeatedly until the Init Container succeeds.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: myapp-pod
  labels:
    app: myapp
spec:
  containers:
  - name: myapp-container
    image: busybox:1.28
    command: ['sh', '-c', 'echo The app is running! && sleep 3600']
  initContainers:
  - name: init-myservice
    image: busybox:1.28
    command: ['sh', '-c', 'until nslookup myservice; do echo waiting for myservice; sleep 2; done;']
  - name: init-mydb
    image: busybox:1.28
    command: ['sh', '-c', 'until nslookup mydb; do echo waiting for mydb; sleep 2; done;']
```

#### K8s Reference Docs

- https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/init-containers/
- https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-pod-initialization/

